# NGPINT: A Next-generation protein-protein interaction software


## Introduction

This software manual describes how to operate NGPINT to generate a list of potential interactors. NGPINT takes one configuration file in csv format. It generates all the intermediate and final files inside the output directory. NGPINT has been published in Briefings in Bioinformatics. Please refer to the manuscript for more details about each module. The entire pipeline has been coded in Python 3. Included in the manual are explanations on how to install dependent softwares in the container environment generated by conda.

# Installing NGPINT

## Downloading NGPINT

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Wiselab2/NGPINT.git
cd NGPINT
gunzip example/*.gz
```

## Installing dependencies

Users are recommended to execute NGPINT inside a conda environment. This will prevent version clashes between installed softwares and those used by `NGPINT`.

## Installing conda (Please skip if you already have Conda installed)

Download conda environment file (Please select the appropriate and latest anaconda version from https://repo.anaconda.com/archive). For this example, we assume the system is Linux. The same command for downloading and installing should be used for both Linux and Mac.

```bash
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/archive/Anaconda3-2020.02-Linux-x86_64.sh
bash Anaconda3-2020.02-Linux-x86_64.sh # do not install VS (needs root privileges)
```

## Creating the NGPINT Environment

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml # This will create an environment named NGPINT
conda activate NGPINT
echo "export PATH=\$PATH:$(pwd)" >> ~/.bashrc # Add this path permanently to the
bashrc file
conda update --all
cd example
```

# Running NGPINT

`NGPINT` requires a configuration file that tells the program where to search for the input files and also sets a number of parameters. Click here to set up the configuration file

## Running the Demonstration Package

After decompressing, the examples folder should contain the following files:

```bash
- Arabidopsis_thaliana.TAIR10.dna.toplevel.fa # Arabidopsis thaliana genome
- Arabidopsis_thaliana.TAIR10.43.modified.gtf # Arabidopsis thaliana gene annotations
- sample_01_headers_modified.fastq
- sample_02_headers_modified.fastq
- sample_03_headers_modified.fastq
- sample_04_headers_modified.fastq
- sample_05_headers_modified.fastq
- sample_06_headers_modified.fastq
- plasmids.fasta
- ../empty_input_arguments.csv
```

The demonstration folder contains the genome sequence of Arabidopsis thaliana, the genome annotations, plasmid sequences and the set of reads from selected and nonselected samples.

## Setting Up the Configuration File

Copy the empty configuration file into this folder

```bash
cp ../empty_input_arguments.csv metadata.csv
```

Open the metadata.csv in excel. You should see 20 lines where the first line is the header and the remaining lines correspond to 19 arguments. We explain each entry in detail below. Additional instructions to run the demonstration are also shown below:

* **input_ended** - Specify whether the selected (input) samples are SE (single end) or PE (paired end). The pipeline will assume SE by default. For this example, the samples are SE. You may enter SE in cell E2 or leave it blank.

* **input_fullpath** - Specify the name of the selected sample (input) fastq files along with their entire path. File MUST end in fastq e.g., `sample_01_headers_modified.fastq`. Mention all replicate files separated by semicolons ‘;’. Please do NOT use commas ‘,’ to separate the replicate files. If you have paired-end data, then place the name of the files for each pair from the same sample next to each other. For example, if you are working with 3 replicates, which are labelled as sample_selected_1, sample_selected_2 and sample_selected_3, then enter the following in cell `E3`

  ```bash
  sample_selected_1_1.fastq;sample_selected_1_2.fastq;sample_selected_2_1.fastq;
  sample_selected_2_2.fastq;sample_selected_3_1.fastq;sample_selected_3_2.fastq
  ```

  Here `sample_selected_1_1.fastq` contains the forward reads from the sample `sample_selected_1.fastq` and contains the `sample_selected_1_2.fastq` reverse reads. Please note that since we will launch the program from the demonstration directory, we do not need to provide the full path of the read files. To be safe, it is best to always provide the entire full path of the files. For this example, enter the following in cell `E3`

  ```bash
  sample_01_headers_modified.fastq;sample_02_headers_modified.fastq;sample_03_headers_m
  odified.fastq;
  ```

  

* 

## Citation

If you use NGPINT, please cite the following papers 

1. Banerjee S, Velásquez-Zapata V, Fuerst, G, Elmore JM, Wise RP. 2020. [NGPINT: A Next-generation protein-protein interaction software. Briefings in Bioinformatics](https://academic.oup.com/bib/advance-article/doi/10.1093/bib/bbaa351/6046042?login=true)
2. Velásquez-Zapata V, Elmore JM, Banerjee S, Dorman KS, Wise RP. 2020. [Y2H-SCORES: A statistical framework to infer protein-protein interactions from next-generation yeast-two-hybrid sequence data. PLOS Computational Biology (submitted)](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.09.08.288365v2)

## License

This software is licensed under the MIT license

## Manual

Please access the manual from the GitHub folder

## Contacting Us

Correspondence regarding the papers should be addressed to Roger.Wise@usda.gov. Please post bugs and issues regarding the NGPINT software at https://github.com/Wiselab2/NGPINT/issues.

